---
title: Gene Wolfe
---

This page is, for now, just bare bones of some thoughts I've had on
Wolfe's work. I read *The Book of the New Sun* series and *The Urth of
the New Sun* in the year of 2014-2015.

## On *The Book of the New Sun*

In reading Book II of *The Aeneid* (the Fagles translation), I noticed
that it has a striking resemblance to the style and tone of much of
Severian's storytelling. I'm wondering if this may have served as an
inspiration for Wolfe.

In Book II, Aeneas relates to Dido the tale of his flight from Troy.
This story presents Virgil with a problem: how does he explain how
Aeneas, a great hero and paragon of warrior virtue (so we're told),
explain how he ran away from a fight while his people were dying and
his city was being sacked? The result is a narrative where Aeneas
repeatedly lurches between being ready to throw away his life for
glory and vengeance, and being restrained and guided to safety by his
goddess mother. Along the way, he somehow loses track of his wife, and
he searches for her until her shade appears to him and tells him to
flee.

Read by a cynic, the entire episode comes off as an elaborate excuse
for cowardice. The reason why it struck me as resembling Severian's
accounts was the way that fate intervenes at choice moments; the
character behaves nobly and rightly at every step of the way (we are
told, from the mouth of that very character), but at each turn things
happen to work out in just such a way that he must flee despite his
brave intentions.

Doing a bit of Googling, I see that others have made a Severian-Aeneas
connection, though I saw no discussion of this particular narrative.

Example here in the comments:
[John & Belle Have a Blog: Gene Wolfe](http://examinedlife.typepad.com/johnbelle/2003/10/gene_wolfe.html)

There is also a connection made to *The Aeneid* in *Solar Labyrinth*
(Robert Borski).

## Books

There are several books dealing with Wolfe's work. I have not read any
of them.

*   [Peter Wright: Attending Daedelus (2003 book)](http://liverpool.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.5949/liverpool/9780853238188.001.0001/upso-9780853238188)

    Based on Wright's dissertation, this is the most comprehensive
    critique of Wolfe's work. I haven't read it yet, but I hope to.
    It's not easy to come by, but it can be found in university
    libraries and it looks like it's now available online to
    university students and faculty.

*   Books by Michael Andre-Driussi:

    *   *Lexicon Urthus: A Dictionary for the Urth Cycle*

        A dictionary of the archaic, quasi-invented terminology used
        by Wolfe in TBOTNS.

    *   *Gate of Horn, Book of Silk: A Guide to Gene Wolfe's The Book
        of the Long Sun and The Book of the Short Sun*

        According to the book blurb, this book consists of
        "dictionary-style entries on the characters, gods, locations,
        themes, and timelines of the novels".

    *   *The Wizard Knight Companion: A Lexicon for Gene Wolfe's The
        Knight and The Wizard*

        A similar dictionary-style approach to *The Wizard Knight*.

* Books by Robert Borski:

    *   *Solar Labyrinth: Exploring Gene Wolfe's "Book of the New
        Sun"*

        From what I gather, this is a book-length speculation on
        various theories about TBOTNS. Some people swear by it, but
        there is widespread criticism that its treatment lacks
        seriousness and is really more on the level of Internet fandom
        rather than serious literary criticism. In particular, it is
        said to indulge heavily in speculation that has almost no
        direct support in the text.

    *   *The Long and the Short of It: More Essays on the Fiction of
        Gene Wolfe*

        These are essays in a similar vein on other works by Wolfe,
        including *Fifth Head of Cerberus* and *The Book of the Short
        Sun*.

## Links

This is just a collection of some links that I've found useful or, in some cases, I liked the looks of but haven't read through fully yet.

*   [The Urth List ](http://www.urth.net/)

    Archives of an email discussion group that was active 1996-2003.
    Robert Borski and Michael Andre-Driussi were participants.

*   [Wolfe Wiki](http://www.wolfewiki.com/pmwiki/pmwiki.php?n=WolfeWiki.Introduction)

*   [Peter Wright: Mapping a Masterwork: A Critical Review of Gene Wolfe's The Book of the New Sun (2002 article)](http://ultan.org.uk/review-botns/)

    This review hints at the contents of his book, *Attending
    Daedelus*.

*   [Paul Kincaid's review of Wright's *Attending Daedelus*](http://www.paulkincaid.co.uk/Reviews/wright-daedalus.htm)

*   [Peter Bebergal: Sci-Fi's Difficult Genius (The New Yorker, April 24, 2015)](http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/sci-fis-difficult-genius)

*   [Ultan's Library: a web resource for the study of Gene Wolfe](http://ultan.org.uk/)

    The site that hosts Wright's article mentioned above. It
    has a variety of other articles about Wolfe's work.
*   [The Green Man](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Man) (also
    GRRM)

